Well, I'm David Ambrose. I work as a storyteller. I work as a promoter of storytelling. I've
been an events promoter pretty much all my working life, with a deep interest in folklore,
folk song especially, but obviously folk stories. I've got some Welsh background because
I've got a Welsh mum born and brought up in Swansea and so she very much knew about the
Wasail tradition out on the gaur. So all of that has informed my storytelling and my singing.
I'd like to tell you a story. This is a story that I believe comes from the West Country,
but where I live on the coast, on the heritage coast as we now call it in the Vale of Glamorgan,
there are such strong links between that part of Wales and the West Country just across the water.
The Old Enemy as some of the old boys in my village still refer to England. You can see
it on a clear day. We don't get many of those, but you can see it. So this is a story from
there from Somerset. There was a farm and the farm was run by an old man and his two
sons. And then the time came, one midwinter, when the old man passed away. And so there
was a wake and there was a burial and then just before Christmas Eve the will was read out.
Now everybody knew really what the will was going to say because the old man didn't have
very much other than his fields and his farmhouse. And it was the custom in that place that that
time that it was the youngest who would inherit everything, inherited the property and the
oldest would get nothing. And so it was when the will was read out, the youngest brother
got the farmhouse and the fields and there was really nothing left for the eldest brother.
And the following morning, Christmas Eve, the youngest brother called his eldest brother
into the front room and he said, oh brother, what a sad day this is, eh? When you're going
to have to leave the family home, the home where you were born and brought up because
of course this is now mine. But I'll tell you what, you're my brother and I'm not going
to see you out on your ear with no roof over your head. I'll tell you what I'm going to
do for you. Because you're my brother, I'm going to let you stay in the old shepherd's
cottage. You know the one at the far end of our land, the other side of the hill? And
you can stay there for a whole year. And all I ask in return is in one year's time, you
give me a shilling for the rent. I can't say fairer than that. And the eldest brother,
he shook his head, but he knew it was what had to be. And so he went off and he packed
a few things that he owned and he put them in a bag. He slung his bag over his shoulder
and he walked over the hill and down. And the evening was already getting gloomy and
chilly by the time he stepped up to that old cottage. And he hadn't been there for a long
time. And I tell you, the years and the weather had not been kind to it. And the satch was
missing off the roof and the windows were broken and the front door was hanging off
its hinges. And he stepped inside and he picked his way across the rotten floorboards and
he went out into the backyard. Sheltering in the lee of an old apple tree, there was
a donkey and an ox, each side of the trunk of that tree. And he looked at the donkey
in the gathering gloom and he could see that the donkey had one leg up off the ground.
Looked in a bad way. And the fur of the donkey, it was mangy. And he looked at the ox and
the back of the ox, it was bending down, it didn't look good. And he looked at the tree
and the tree had three wizened old apples on it, each of them rotten. And the young
man, he turned back and he went into the house and he cleared the twigs and bits of dead
bird out of the grate and he managed to get a fire going and then he pulled his coat up
over himself and he went to sleep there on the floorboards. And the next morning he got
up and he knew what he was going to do. He walked out to the outskirts of the village,
up to the top of the hill where the wise old woman's cottage was. And he spoke to her and
he told her all his troubles. And she said, my son, listen to me. You look after those
beasts and those beasts will look after you. You've got to restore their health with herbs.
And you will see what you will see. And if you do that, you will restore your own fortune.
So the young man, he took her advice. She told him which herbs to pick and what to do
with them, how to make them into a poultice. And day after day, he boiled up the herbs
and he applied the poultice to the donkey's fur and its gammy leg and he applied the hot
herby poultice to the back of the ox. And he did that all through the winter. By the
spring, well, you could see the difference because the donkey's fur, where it had been
mangy, it was now beginning to get a sleek gloss to it. And he began to put his leg down
on the ground, did the donkey. And the back of the ox that had been so bent down was
beginning to straighten up like a good sturdy oak tabletop. And not only that, but he was
coming back. Come May, the apple tree began to put out beautiful blossom because what
was happening was this, that poultice that the young man left on the ground after he
finished rubbing it into the ox and the donkey. Well, the ox and the donkey, they ate it.
And what goes in must come out. And that beautiful rich manure fed the roots of the apple tree
and now it was covered in sweet scented pink blossom. And come late summer, the branches
of the apple tree, they were bending down low, heavy with fruit. And the young man,
he picked that fruit and most of it he sold in the market, but some he kept for himself
and turned it into cider. And when the winter evenings drew in, he could light the fire,
he could pour himself a glass of his own cider and there he could sit and sup. And so it
came around to Christmas Eve. Just before Christmas Eve there's a knock at the door
and there's the youngest brother. Hello brother, how you doing, eh? I've just come to remind
you about that little matter of the rent that you owe me. Tomorrow, a silver shilling, I
hope you've got it. And the eldest brother said, well, I'm sorry, you know, it's been
hard for me and I haven't got it. Can you let me off? Wow, brother, I thought it might
be like that. So I'll tell you what, I'm going to make a bargain with you. You see, I've
been talking to some of the old people in the village and they tell me that somewhere
around this cottage there's some treasure buried. And they also tell me that when you've
got an ox and a donkey together on Christmas Eve, if you wait until the bells of midnight
start to ring out, you can hear what that ox and that donkey have to say to each other.
So brother, here's my proposal. Tomorrow night, Christmas Eve, you spend the night up at the
old farmhouse. I spend the night down here and I'm going to listen to what your ox and
your donkey have to say about that buried treasure. And if you agree to that, I'll let
you off the rent. And the young man, once again, he just felt everything was against
him, but what else could he do but agree? And so the eldest brother, he's there in the
house, the youngest brother goes away up the hill, whistling, being very pleased with himself.
Eldest brother, he went to go over to the fire. Before he sat down, he poured himself
some cider and it was the very last drop and it was cloudy, but he lifted it up. He was
just about to drink when he remembered an old custom. And he went outside into the yard
and he stood under the clear glittering star-filled sky and he raised that glass up towards the
old apple tree. And he said, apple tree, apple tree, I will give back to thou what thou has
given to me. And let's have hatfuls and capfuls and three bushel bagfuls and little apples
under the stairs. Hip, hip, hooray. And with that, he poured that cider all around the
roots of the tree and he took away the empty glass and he started to walk back to the house,
to the cottage. And as he did so, from behind him, he heard a great big belch and he turned
around and he looked, but there was no one there. And he looked at the tree and he noticed
that the branches of the tree were beginning to bend down low to the ground and then rise
up and they bent down towards him three times. And when he looked again, he could see in
the folds of the trunk of the tree, something that looked like the face of an old man wrinkled
into a smile. And he said, apple tree, was that you? And the apple tree said, yes, it
was. And it's not every day that somebody gives me a taste of my own juice. Thank you
very much. You've been good to me, I'll be good to you. Do you know what? If you were
dig down underneath my roots, you would find a great big box of treasure. And if I was
you, I'd dig it up straight away and I'd hide it somewhere where no one else could
find it. And the young man, he stood there amazed and he couldn't speak, but he had
heard and as he watched, it seemed to him that the face disappeared back into the trunk
of the tree and it was just a tree again. But he didn't hesitate. He turned, he went
back to the house, he got a spade, he began to dig and sure enough, the spade struck something
hard. There was the lid of a treasure chest. He broke it open, lifted the lid and it was
full of Roman gold. And he hefted that chest out of the ground and he hid it somewhere
very safe indeed. And then the next day, he went up to the big house and the youngest
brother came down and took his place behind the door, listening out for what the ox and
the donkey would have to say. And at the first stroke of midnight, when the church bells
all over the land began to ring out for Christmas Eve, this is what the youngest brother heard.
He heard the ox turn to the donkey and say, hello, donk, how you doing then? And the donkey
said to the ox, well, I'm not too bad. I tell you what, the diet's improved, hasn't it?
So it has said the ox. And how you feeling, donk? How you doing? Well, I tell you what,
said the donkey, my leg, the articulation is right back in it. Thank you very much.
What about yourself, ox? Oh, said the ox, I'm feeling so good. I'm feeling so much better.
Well, I'm feeling as strong as a, well, as strong as I've ever felt. And I'll tell you
another thing, donkey, says the ox. If that fool behind the door thinks he's going to
hear any secrets from us, he's got another think coming. And with that, the last stroke
of midnight rang out and the ox and the donkey, they fell silent. And the youngest brother,
he walked away empty handed. But if he had looked and if he had seen, he might have noticed
just the faint trace of a wrinkled smile amongst the gnarled bark of the old apple tree. Three
golden apples fell from the sky. One for the one who told the story, one for those who
listened and one for those who came before so long ago, who they are we do not know.
And that's the end of my story.